rule | ro͞ol | noun 1 one of a set of explicit or understood regulations or principles governing conduct within a particular activity or sphere: the rules of the game were understood. • a principle that operates within a particular sphere of knowledge, describing or prescribing what is possible or allowable: the rules of grammar. • a code of practice and discipline for a religious order or community: the Rule of St. Benedict. 2 control of or dominion over an area or people: the revolution brought an end to British rule. 3 (the rule) the normal or customary state of things: such accidents are the exception rather than the rule. 4 a strip of wood or other rigid material used for measuring length or marking straight lines; a ruler. • a thin printed line or dash, generally used to separate headings, columns, or sections of text. 5 (Rules) Australian English short for Australian Rules (football) • Law an order made by a judge or court with reference to a particular case only. verb 1 [with object] exercise ultimate power or authority over (an area and its people): the region today is ruled by elected politicians | [no object] : the period in which Spain ruled over Portugal. • (of a feeling) have a powerful and restricting influence on: her whole life seemed to be ruled by fear. • [no object] be a dominant or powerful factor: [with complement] : the black market rules supreme. • [no object] informal be very good or the best: Jackie tells me about Hanna's newest band, and says that it absolutely rules. • Astrology (of a planet) have a particular influence over (a sign of the zodiac, house, etc.): the tenth House, ruled by Saturn and associated with Capricorn. 2 [with clause] pronounce authoritatively and legally to be the case: a federal court ruled that he was unfairly dismissed from his job. 3 [with object] make parallel lines across (paper): rule the pages horizontally and print the information within the rules.. PHRASES as a rule usually, but not always: any architect knows that, as a rule, old buildings are more soundly built than new ones. make it a rule to do something have it as a habit or general principle to do something: I make it a rule never to mix business with pleasure. rule of law | ˌro͞ol əv ˈlô | the restriction of the arbitrary exercise of power by subordinating it to well-defined and established laws: when military dictators fall, the democrats who follow them must try to restore the rule of law. rule of thumb | ˌro͞ol əv ˈTHəm | a broadly accurate guide or principle, based on experience or practice rather than theory: a useful rule of thumb is that about ten hours will be needed to analyze each hour of recorded data. rule the roost be in complete control: in this particular society men rule the roost and women have a low status and few rights. PHRASAL VERBS rule in (rule something in, rule in something) include something as a possibility: I am not ruling it in, and I am not ruling it out. rule out (rule someone or something out, rule out someone or something) exclude someone or something as a possibility: further testing had ruled out any infection | the government would not rule out inviting foreign investors to help improve local ports. • (rule someone out, rule out someone) prevent someone from doing or being eligible for something, especially taking part in sports: a shoulder injury ruled him out for most of the season | Robinson was ruled out of the remainder of the tournament with a torn ligament. DERIVATIVES ruleless | ˈro͞ol(l)əs | adjective ORIGIN Middle English: from Old French reule (noun), reuler (verb), from late Latin regulare, from Latin regula ‘straight stick’.